README.md, before:

# Smart Recipe Finder API

This is the backend service for the "Smart Recipe Finder" application, built as part of a technical assessment. It provides a RESTful API for managing and searching recipes, all running within a Docker environment.

## Tech Stack

- **Language:** Python 3.11
- **Framework:** FastAPI
- **Database:** MySQL 8.0
- **ORM:** SQLAlchemy
- **Data Validation:** Pydantic v2
- **Containerization:** Docker & Docker Compose

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/) installed on your system.

## Getting Started

Follow these steps to get the application running locally.

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/YOUR_REPOSITORY.git
cd smart-recipe-finder
```

### 2. Set Up Environment Variables

Create a local environment file by copying the provided example.

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

The default values are pre-configured for a smooth startup. If you need to change the application or database ports because they are already in use on your machine, you can do so by editing the APP_PORT and MYSQL_PORT variables in your local .env file.


### 3. Build and Run the Application

Use Docker Compose to build the images and start the services in detached mode (`-d`).

```bash
docker-compose up --build -d
```

The API service will now be running and accessible at `http://localhost:8000`.

## API Documentation

Once the application is running, the interactive API documentation (powered by Swagger UI) is available at:

[**http://localhost:8000/docs**](http://localhost:8000/docs)

You can use this interface to explore, test, and interact with all the available API endpoints.

## Testing

A comprehensive test suite has been newly implemented to ensure the reliability and correctness of the API endpoints.

To run the test suite, you first need to set up your test environment.

### 1. Install Dependencies

Install the required dependencies, including those for testing:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### 2. Run Tests

The project includes a comprehensive test suite covering various functionalities. You can run different sets of tests as follows:

#### Full Tests

To run the entire test suite, execute `pytest` without any specific markers:

```bash
docker-compose exec app pytest
```

#### Smoke Tests

Smoke tests are a subset of tests designed to quickly verify that the most important functions of the application are working correctly. To run only the smoke tests execute:

```bash
docker-compose exec app pytest -m smoke
```

#### Evaluation Tests

Evaluation tests are designed to assess specific aspects of the application, often involving dedicated datasets or complex scenarios. To run only the evaluation tests execute:

```bash
docker-compose exec app pytest -m eval
```

## Evaluation & Benchmarking

One of the core goals of this project is to quantitatively compare different search and filtering methods.

### Metrics Implemented
- **Accuracy:** Percentage of queries where the target recipe was found.
- **Latency:** Average execution time per query.
- **Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR):** Measures ranking quality (how high the relevant recipe appears).
- **ZRR (Zero Result Rate):** Percentage of queries returning no results.

### How to Run Benchmarks
**Run Evaluation Script**:
```bash
docker-compose exec app python scripts/evaluate.py
```

## Project Status

Currently implemented features:
- [x] Project setup with Docker and a scalable layered architecture.
- [x] **Create** and **Read** (by ID and list all) operations for recipes.
- [x] **Update** and **Delete** operations for recipes.
- [x] **Smart Filtering Logic (Refactored)**
- [x] Full-text search.
- [x] Comprehensive test suite.
- [ ] Vector Search Implementation

Commit message:

Standardize database configuration and improve test setup

README.md, after:

# Smart Recipe Finder API

This is the backend service for the "Smart Recipe Finder" application, built as part of a technical assessment. It provides a RESTful API for managing and searching recipes, all running within a Docker environment.

## Tech Stack

- **Language:** Python 3.11
- **Framework:** FastAPI
- **Database:** MySQL 8.0
- **ORM:** SQLAlchemy
- **Data Validation:** Pydantic v2
- **Containerization:** Docker & Docker Compose

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/) installed on your system.

## Getting Started

Follow these steps to get the application running locally.

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/YOUR_REPOSITORY.git
cd smart-recipe-finder
```

### 2. Set Up Environment Variables

Create a local environment file by copying the provided example.

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

The default values are pre-configured for a smooth startup. If you need to change the application or database ports because they are already in use on your machine, you can do so by editing the APP_PORT and MYSQL_PORT variables in your local .env file.


### 3. Build and Run the Application

Use Docker Compose to build the images and start the services in detached mode (`-d`).

```bash
docker-compose up --build -d
```

The API service will now be running and accessible at `http://localhost:8000`.

## API Documentation

Once the application is running, the interactive API documentation (powered by Swagger UI) is available at:

[**http://localhost:8000/docs**](http://localhost:8000/docs)

You can use this interface to explore, test, and interact with all the available API endpoints.

## Testing

A comprehensive test suite has been newly implemented to ensure the reliability and correctness of the API endpoints.

To run the test suite, you first need to set up your test environment.

### 1. Install Dependencies

Install the required dependencies, including those for testing:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### 2. Run Tests

The project includes a comprehensive test suite covering various functionalities. You can run different sets of tests as follows:

#### Full Tests

To run the entire test suite, execute `pytest` without any specific markers:

```bash
docker-compose exec app pytest
```

#### Smoke Tests

Smoke tests are a subset of tests designed to quickly verify that the most important functions of the application are working correctly. To run only the smoke tests execute:

```bash
docker-compose exec app pytest -m smoke
```

#### Evaluation Tests

Evaluation tests are designed to assess specific aspects of the application, often involving dedicated datasets or complex scenarios. To run only the evaluation tests execute:

```bash
docker-compose exec app pytest -m eval
```

## Seeding the Database

To populate your database with sample recipe data, you can use the `seed_db.py` script. This is particularly useful for development and testing purposes.

To seed the database, run the following command:

```bash
docker-compose exec app python scripts/seed_db.py
```

This script will add a predefined set of recipes to your database, which you can then query via the API.

## Evaluation & Benchmarking

One of the core goals of this project is to quantitatively compare different search and filtering methods.

### Metrics Implemented
- **Accuracy:** Percentage of queries where the target recipe was found.
- **Latency:** Average execution time per query.
- **Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR):** Measures ranking quality (how high the relevant recipe appears).
- **ZRR (Zero Result Rate):** Percentage of queries returning no results.

### How to Run Benchmarks
**Run Evaluation Script**:
```bash
docker-compose exec app python scripts/evaluate.py
```

## Project Status

Currently implemented features:
- [x] Project setup with Docker and a scalable layered architecture.
- [x] **Create** and **Read** (by ID and list all) operations for recipes.
- [x] **Update** and **Delete** operations for recipes.
- [x] **Smart Filtering Logic (Refactored)**
- [x] Full-text search.
- [x] Comprehensive test suite.
- [x] Script for evaluating search and filtering methods.
- [ ] Vector Search Implementation
